Behind the Painting – The Final Update

The final result of the Behind the Painting project can be tried out now and a short summary can be seen in the screencast we made. The final result provides a new experience with regards to paintings. For our project we specifically choose a well-known artist, Piet Mondriaan. The reason for this is that in choosing well-known paintings from a famous artist, the possibility arises to play with existing connotations people might have of a painting. Paintings such as the Mona Lisa, Picasso’s or Mondrian’s have been distributed over the world in all kinds of media in such great quantities, chances are high you are familiar with them on some level. 

However, an experience with such paintings when actually going to see them can be limited. Although the experience might be fantastic and moving, it is still a person standing in front of a painting and looking at it. Thinking about it from this perspective it makes you wonder what other stories or possibilities this painting holds. What could it possibly mean to create such an artwork? What does it actually mean when people are looking at the painting? To expand on people’s experience we want to confront them with such situations and perspectives.

As such, we have created an environment in the browser which allows people to have that initial experience looking at a Mondrian painting. However, we provide the possibility to take other steps. Using their smartphone, participants become interactors and have the possibility to go behind the painting and enter the world of Mondrian. From a 2D painting the interactor is transported into the 3D version of that painting, almost as walking through a city (a remark that is not uncommon when discussing Mondrian). In this Mondrian world interactors get a chance to move around using the keyboard, moreover they get the opportunity to become artists themselves. It is also possible to move around using their own smartphone, but for the sake of clarity we have left this functionality out for now. Participants randomly receive a typical Mondrian color (red, blue, yellow, white) and can paint the ‘buildings’. The world doesn’t only chance in the 3D world, when an interactor wants to go back to the gallery that holds the 2D painting, which might have changed as well depending on the actions of the interactor.

 On top of that, the interactor is not creating these works alone. Multiple people can be in the world of Mondrian we created and collaboratively paint. Sometimes you will even see another interactor moving along in the world, they are represented as simple cubes. If the interactor wants, he or she can save the eventual result, the newly created painting and create their own gallery. Interestingly enough this entire project truly reconsiders the whole notion of what a gallery actually is. We have created a gallery with paintings very similar to the traditional gallery one might expect in a museum. But, in this gallery you can enter the world of Mondrian we created, change the painting, save it and create a new personal gallery as well as change the initial traditional gallery the interactor entered. 

The eventual artwork created by an interactor can also then be viewed in augmented reality with the use of markers. As such this project also lends itself greatly as an art installation (although this could also easily be done at home). The artwork installation at a physical location allows for the possibility for us to hang simple marker on a wall, if the interactor who created an artwork moves their mobile phone to see the wall, they would see their own artwork hanging there (and possibly the artwork of other interactors). 

The behind the painting project is crossing the boundaries of traditional art viewing and creation. It offers new ways of looking and making. We believe this to be aesthetically pleasing but also offering answers to present day issues with regards to musea having problems getting visitors. We offer new dimensions to exploration of the artwork, leaving someone who participated and interacted with a different and hopefully more wholesome experience than the ‘simple’ viewing of a painting in a museum. The latter is also crucial seeing that for many people a visit to a museum isn’t possible. Some painting can only be seen at a specific location in a specific country very far from someone’s home. Behind the painting offers new horizons and we are proud to have been able to work on this project.   

Regards,

Ray and Samuel
